hello world so these are cs50's office
hours and if you've not joined us before
this has been an opportunity over the
past few months first to spend some time
on campus answering your questions here
live via the Internet so I thought I'd
give you a quick tour of some of the
buildings outside and inside of which I
spent quite a bit of time when I myself
was in graduate school because indeed
we're outside the original buildings of
Harvard School of Engineering and
applied sciences but we're also around
Harvard Law School so come on and take a
look
so over here to your right is Jefferson
Hall which is actually the physics
building on campus so graduate students
and undergraduates would spend a lot of
time in this red brick building doing
experiments taking classes and the like
that connects to another building over
there also in red brick called Croft
Hall which is connected so you might be
able to pass from one building to
another very easily going between
classes and if you look over my shoulder
there there's sort of a weird Bridge
that's connecting what is cruft Hall
and the building to its left which is
Pierce Hall which is actually one of the
earliest buildings in the Harvard School
of Engineering and applied sciences it's
been there for so very long and indeed
it's likely to be renovated in the
coming years to actually make it all the
more accessible to students faculty and
staff alike but that bridge connects
just a couple of the floors and now
behind me and way back there with a lot
of glass and stone sort of in White in
between all of these brick buildings is
Maxwell dworkin and so that's the
computer science building where I myself
and a lot of my colleagues and Friends
spend time in graduate school and more
recently did undergraduates as well but
the engineering school actually moved
all the way across the Charles River
which is a large body of water that cuts
between Cambridge and Boston
Massachusetts so most of the activity
engineering-wise on campus is over there
nowadays but lastly before we have a
seat on your left is Langdale Hall which
is a beautiful large library for
Harvard's law school and in fact if
you've seen any of the videos
introductory or otherwise from cs50's
introduction to computer science for
lawyers cs50's own Doug Lloyd and I
actually filmed that class inside of one
of the most beautiful rooms in that
building there but why don't we go for a
quick stroll and we've got a picnic
bench lined up for us today and if you'd
like to start asking questions via the
chat we're happy to answer any and all
of your questions about cs50 computer
science more generally Harvard indeed on
this next step on our tour
well wait a minute who do we have here
for the internet looks like we've seen
smithy's own Brian you and Carter zenke
what a pleasant surprise to see you out
here with a microphone no less today
uh so a few questions for you David and
also for you Brian
um one of which is if someone wants to
start learning computer science what
mathematics should they perhaps know
maybe go first to David Linda Brian oh
that's a good question so I I
generally when you're diving into
introductory computer science like
something like cs50 honestly definitely
having comfort with arithmetic Edition
subtraction and so forth makes sense and
also a little bit of comfort with
algebra so that you can understand
symbolic manipulations with things like
x's and y's and Z's or notation like f
of x and the like but beyond that that's
really all you need to get your foot
into the door but when it comes to
higher level classes and Graphics
machine learning I think more math would
indeed help yeah definitely I think a
lot of the more interesting developments
in artificial intelligence recently are
very much based in mathematics but you
don't need that level of mathematics
just to get started or just to try
programming for the first time just
basic familiarity with algebra is
helpful as is a little bit of logic like
if this and that are true what else
might be true and starting to think
about that type of thing but nothing
formal necessarily and if I can ask a
question of Brian who you haven't seen
as much of over the past couple of years
Brian what have you been up to uh well
after I after I was done working at
Harvard full time I started working in
software industry so I've been
programming at larger software companies
and smaller software companies alike but
I've always definitely enjoy being back
at Harvard and working with the cs50
team whenever I can yeah and still
teaching his course is offered not only
through edx via which you might have
discovered Brian's class on AI and web
programming but also through Harvard's
extension school where adults of all
ages can actually pursue credit and
degrees through more traditional
structure ta's deadlines and and more
and Brian I know when folks go to
Industry they're always still learning
and so I'm curious is there I think
maybe one thing you've learned this past
year that you didn't learn in Prior
years yeah absolutely I feel like the
Technologies are constantly changing
their new developments and languages uh
recently I started picking up rust as a
programming language that I've had a lot
of interest in it's gained a lot of
popularity in recent years and it has
some nice benefits of a low-level
language like C without having to deal
with some of the memory related bugs
that you might have encountered if
you've worked through any of the memory
problem sets and see and so learning new
languages learning new technology is one
of the nice things about working in
software is that they're always new
things to learn and actually on that
note one of the questions we often get
from students online is about languages
like rust and go and sort of the flavor
of the week so to speak because it seems
to me very frustrating if you spend all
of this time all of this struggle trying
to learn C or python or Java or C plus
plus and then you have to go and learn
something else and can you perhaps speak
to that tension between learning's
foundational material but also having to
keep up with it yeah absolutely I think
think learning a new language gets
easier over time that once you know one
programming language many programming
languages draw inspiration from each
other and are based on similar ideas so
the things you learn in one language
definitely apply when you're going to
another language and trying to apply
that and what's interesting is looking
at how different programming languages
try to solve problems from previous
programming languages like a language
like C gives you a lot of control over
memory but it introduces potentially
bugs if you're not careful about freeing
memory when you're done using it if
you're not careful about accessing
something in an array when the array
might not have that many elements or
accessing null values and so different
languages have made different choices to
try to make those kinds of Errors less
likely and so I find it interesting to
learn something new and learn how it can
solve a problem that I was running into
in a language I was using before
I can't help but make a joke there's
been a but you have a bug like that's
been okay all gone
okay
um so I guess I'm curious Brian you said
you're learning rust
um what kinds of problems does rust
solve other languages might not be able
to solve themselves yeah a lot of it is
around memory safety and type safety so
type safety if you're working with a
string like text for example and you try
to add a number to it not all languages
are going to handle that very well and
it might run into problems if you think
something is a number and you try to add
something to it and it runs into a
problem and so languages that have
strong type systems languages like rust
are pretty good at trying to catch those
kinds of problems early so you can avoid
making that kind of mistake and you'll
be notified if you do make that kind of
mistake and the other big benefit is
around memory safety that the types of
memory issues that we often run into in
lower level languages like C can be
frustrating to deal with and frustrating
to debug and so if we can make decisions
in the programming language that make
those easier to debug or harder to uh
harder to have problems come up in
practice that can definitely be helpful
so why is it would you say that
languages like python are so popular
which doesn't have types or really it's
more dynamically typed so you don't have
to specify in advance like in C in cs50
what the type is
yeah I think I mean python is still my
go-to language if there's something I
need to do quickly and I think one of
the benefits of a dynamically typed
language like python is that you can
write very little code to get a lot done
and sometimes something that takes only
a couple lines of code in Python is
going to take many more lines and much
more time to write in a different
programming language and so there are
trade-offs between all of these no one
language is necessarily always better
than the other you have to figure out
what's your use case how often are you
going to use the code are you going to
have to maintain the code later all of
that might contribute to your decision
about what language is the right choice
for the thing you're working on and
maybe to preempt one question like in
cs50p cs50's introduction to programming
with python we introduced type hints a
little bit in Python
does that solve the problem you're
speaking to that rust also solves it's
related definitely adding type hints
helps to make clear what types You're
Expecting and what you're dealing with
and different languages will have
sometimes stronger or less strong
safeguards when it comes to what types
are okay and how they can interact and
so Rusk is just a little bit more strict
about trying to prevent more types of
errors but python typins I definitely
find are helpful too and often when I'm
writing larger code bases in Python
adding those types is definitely useful
just for signaling what's the what's
type some are we dealing with and how
can I avoid making those kinds of
mistakes nice
and if someone's just starting out and
they're trying to figure out what
language they should begin learning like
you mentioned it all depends on the
context but I'm curious let someone know
the problem they want to solve what
kinds of aspects of that problem should
they care about to help them inform what
programming languages they should learn
if that makes sense
yeah so are you asking about like if
you're first learning programming having
not known any languages or okay
um I think in that case I do like cs50s
approach starting with C which is not an
approach that a lot of programming
courses take nowadays
um but as David and I have talked about
before it's very helpful to really
understand the fundamentals and see
nothing is given to you for granted if
you want something you need to implement
it yourself and so that really helps to
give you a good understanding of the
basics of programming the fundamentals
of how the computer works and how to
interact with it but in practice if
you're going to build a web application
nowadays or a mobile app you're probably
not going to write it in C you're
probably going to write it in one of the
languages that allows you to build those
things a little more easily and gives
you a little more out of the box this is
a debate I still have with colleagues of
mine especially at other universities
like when we go to conferences in the
computer science education space who are
wondering why do we still teach C since
so many other classes have moved on to
python or Java or the like but I think
for exactly this reason of sort of
building up from the ground up and
giving you and us sort of a bottom-up
understanding of how all this stuff
works
and when someone was learning a new
language like there's probably a lot to
learn procedurally as in like how to
solve a particular problem but there's
also some memorization involved like the
syntax of a language and so I'm curious
do you have tips for folks on how to
memorize things faster when it comes to
computer science interesting
and I'm hearing from the folks online we
should probably talk a little louder
into our mics
learning faster honestly I feel like AI
is going to be the solution to that
because autocomplete is about to if you
haven't experienced it yet get a lot
better and honestly I mean that largely
seriously because
um vs code and similar text editors and
full-fledged Ides for years have been
able to auto complete certain things so
that if you at least remember the name
of the function but not its arguments
you can very quickly see like a little
pop-up that sort of guides you to the
solution there syntactically I think
even more so now with tools like GitHub
co-pilot which is a full-fledged AI tool
which doesn't just deterministically
auto-complete something you're typing
but it rather suggests multiple lines of
code that might be where you're going
logically honestly will just help with a
lot of that struggle with a lot of the
syntax and specifics of a language
because it'll just kind of show you with
high probability what it could be or
should be that you want to type
but maybe a more educational answer
might be from buying here no
dancer a lot I think that makes a lot of
sense and honestly some stuff you will
not end up memorizing and one of the
nice things about having the internet at
your disposal is that if there's
something you need to know it's very
easy to look it up and find out and so I
think a lot of getting comfortable with
the language just comes with practice
and using that language a lot but
definitely once you start learning
multiple languages every language has a
different way to take some text and make
it lowercase and the way you do that is
different all the time and so it's easy
to get those confused and so that's
where autocomplete we're looking
something up can be helpful because
realistically you're not going to
memorize everything and that's okay and
realize too it's relative to the
language like one of the first languages
I learned after a c was Pearl and oh my
God like even after all these years I
still don't know how to read Pearl codes
sometimes because they're such clever
syntactic tricks that you can use to
solve problems I kind of feel like Ruby
is a little bit like that which I don't
know very well but we've had to use a
little bit and I'm always trying to
Google the syntax but it's really hard
to Google syntax because search engines
tend to ignore weird things like
punctuation and so it's hard so I
empathize too I think it's still a word
while goal to memorize like the core
features of some language like when
you're working and you need to look
something up that kind of cuts out your
flow as you're working on some problem
so probably worthwhile to learn those
core features and beyond that probably
turn the internet for extra help yeah
for sure
all right so um maybe a related question
is someone says they're facing
difficulties learning pointers what
kinds of pointers could we give them to
learn about pointers
that one just takes time I think
honestly and the tale I tell in cs50
sometimes is that I still remember 25
years later where I was on this campus
the day that I finally got pointers I
was in the Elliott House dining hall so
one of the undergraduate cafeterias I
was in the back right corner I was
talking to my TF nishat Meda who was my
very first computer science TF and he
very kindly spent a little more time
with me that day walking me through some
of my questions much like you might have
and for some reason it was that 10th
11th attempt of trying to understand
them that the light bulb finally went
off for me
um that said I do think looking at
things in pictures or finding in
textbooks or online references
representations of what's really going
on with pointers can really actually
help and we try to do a bit of that in
cs50 but surely focusing on
visualizations if you can find them
online might help further
nice and maybe a question for Brian so
in Industry I I maybe guess I assume you
have to learn a new framework as you
transition is that true
uh that can often be true there are a
lot of different Frameworks for building
web applications or mobile applications
or whatever it is that you're designing
and so sometimes when you enter a new
job in Industry you might be asked to
work in a framework that you're not
familiar with before and so that's where
uh relying on your path knowledge
figuring out how to apply it to a new
framework you might not have seen before
can be helpful reading documentation
looking at examples the same types of
things you do when learning a language
for the first time you can often use
when looking at a new framework for the
first time and for those who aren't
familiar could you define what a
framework actually is
yeah so a framework uh well depends on
the context but often it's a bunch of
code that's already been written that
helps to make it easier to solve some
problem or create something and so a lot
of my experiences with web application
development and so there are a lot of
different web Frameworks a bunch of code
that's already been written to handle
what do you do when you get an incoming
web request and how do you look at the
data that's in the request and send back
a response and have different templates
for the responses and so that code is
usually not the interesting code that
you want to write you want to write the
code specific to your web application
and so the framework takes care of a lot
of the stuff that's common to a lot of
different web applications leaving you
to be able to focus on what's most
interesting to your project
and maybe to make this real for folks
less familiar like in cs50x you might
recall that we introduced flask toward
the end of the class as a micro
framework but in cs50w which is Brian's
introduction to web programming with
python and JavaScript
um you use Django and do you mind
distinguishing something like flask and
Django for folks both of which I think
are really Frameworks yeah flask and
Django are both python web Frameworks so
you use the Python programming language
to build a web application and both of
the Frameworks give you some tools out
of the box to help you do that flask is
a much smaller framework it does the
basics of handling requests letting you
route requests to the right place
depending on what comes after the slash
that the user types into the URL when
they're visiting a website Django is a
much more full-featured framework it
adds features like giving you database
models so if you want to keep track of
information in your database and the
structure of that database might be
evolving or changing over time it lets
you keep track of changes to that over
time using a tool known as migrations
and it gives you a lot of features for
administrators to go into a web
application and make money modifications
or changes to the data and helps to give
you some more control over the way that
requests are handled over the internet
and so if you need some of those more
advanced features Django can be very
useful at just helping you build an
application more quickly but flask is
definitely in use by a lot of web
applications I think it's a great python
web framework and I definitely use it
too yeah and one of the reasons we use
it in cs50x particularly since we only
spend a few weeks on web programming is
that it is like micro framework like it
only does what we wanted to do without
you having to learn an entire framework
unto itself in cs50 we can largely focus
on python itself
and let's say someone's an aspiring
programmer they want to be you know a
great computer scientist would it be
worthwhile for them to try to create
their own framework or should they maybe
learn something else that's out there
this is why the world has so many
Frameworks and libraries because
reasonable people will disagree
um I mean developing your own framework
I think would be the solution to a
problem if you and your own projects or
in your professional Pursuits think that
flask and Django or laravelle in the PHP
world or any number of other
frameworks.net aren't quite doing for
you what you want them to do then sure
you could consider building out your own
framework the catch is that certainly an
industry that's probably not the best
use of time because you would spend so
much time Reinventing a lot of wheels
just to make arguably marginal changes
that it might not really be the best use
of your time if it detracts from
actually building your tool building
your product building your personal
project whatever it is so I think that's
the tension and that's why I think you
tend to see that only a few Frameworks
within each ecosystem tend to stand out
because there's a lot of great ideas I'm
sure there's a lot of great micro and
otherwise Frameworks like freely
available on GitHub but they end up
falling by the wayside because people
just underestimate perhaps or just don't
have the time to put into it
the other thing I would take into
account is security there are a lot of
security concerns and vulnerabilities on
the internet and one of the nice things
about using a framework that's been
developed over a long period of time
well tested by a lot of different people
is that people have been able to
identify a lot of those security
vulnerabilities and they've been able to
be fixed too and so if you're building a
framework on your own those kinds of
security concerns are definitely
something you need to be thinking about
and there's a lot of potential security
problems and so from a safety
perspective it's often safer to use a
framework that's been well tested over a
long period of time and where these
vulnerabilities have been looked at
already but I think it can be a good
exercise if you're interested in you
know understanding a little bit more
about what goes into a framework to try
to build one but I definitely use
caution before taking a framework you've
built yourself and using it out in the
real world yeah case in point in cs50
has its own python Library which was
meant to be a pretty small library that
just ports from C to python some of the
functions that we use in the beginning
of the class like get int and get float
and the like but over time we added a
bit more functionality to it
specifically for SQL so that within
cs50x you can use a function called
execute that just handles the whole
process of letting you execute selects
and inserts deletes updates and the like
and it just simplifies the use of SQL
and yet over time even though this was a
nice idea it wasn't a very complicated
implementation we realized oh my gosh
like there's this corner case or oh my
gosh it needs to work now with sqlite
and MySQL and postgres and oh my gosh
there is this security issue here and
it's become a massive file that was
never Our intention and so much pain to
chase down all of these bugs and it
might have in retrospect been a lot
better just to use something off the
shelf rather than thinking we can do
this better
and a follow-on question here from abood
who's asking is it worthwhile to learn
data structure which I think it's
actually an interesting question now
because there are so many Frameworks
that give so many things to you like off
the off the cuff so is it worthwhile to
learn those underlying details still
I definitely think it is useful to have
an understanding of data structures and
having a sense for which data structure
is the right choice for the problem that
you're trying to solve and that might be
simple data structures like in Python
for example there are some common data
structures or lists and dictionaries and
sets and each of them have their
different trade-offs some of them are
faster at certain types of things and
slower at other types of things and so
if you're going to start storing more
and more data you want your project
whatever you're building to be efficient
ideally and so having a sense for what
data structure is the right choice that
can definitely be helpful and then as
you start getting into larger and larger
projects if you think on the scale of
companies are restoring massive amounts
of data then they really need to think
about how are we going to store this
data in a way that's going to work in a
way that's going to scale well as we get
more and more data in a way that's going
to be efficient and so thinking about
things like Big O notation which are
introduced to in cs58 to think about
what is the performance of these data
structures that definitely has value
yeah and I would be even blunter like
why wouldn't you like if you want to be
a programmer or if you want to be a
computer scientist like these are tools
in your toolkit like data structures and
algorithms and mathematical models that
Brian alludes to and so like that's all
of the ingredients that's going to make
you better at your job at your personal
projects or the like
unless this one takes this advice to
Heart they want to learn all about data
structures what course should they take
then
no um so cs50 does touch on a range of
data structures not in great depth but
week five of cs50 if you're already
taking or planning to take cs50 I do
think is a very good introduction to the
range of options and by data structures
we mean things in simplest forms like
arrays those aren't really data
structures but that's about as basic as
you can get we introduced things called
link lists but they're singly and doubly
linked lists we introduce uh hash tables
which is sort of an amalgam of arrays
and linked lists we talk about trees and
tries and other structures but you could
spend much more time on data structures
and algorithms DSA is often what CS
people might describe it as one of the
algorithms class which does touch on
data structures is something from
Princeton if you look for introduction
to algorithms on coursera.org you should
be able to find a free class from our
friends there and Brian do you have
other that was the one that came to mind
actually too I think there are also a
lot of good online not necessarily
courses but online references and books
even Wikipedia is a good place to start
if you're curious about like what does
this data structure do and how does it
work I found that Wikipedia is often a
good first place to look just to
understand the basics of the data
structure and
um so I think any of those are
definitely good places to get started
yeah
and Switching gears a little bit these
questions just in thank you Max there's
some new questions here so I'll scroll
through these and find some
um one off the top though that I saw
from earlier which is switch gears a
little bit is why is it 50 and not let's
say 33. oh
um so Ed Harvard here historically the
second to last or penultimate digit of a
course's number has indicated what type
of class it is so in the case of cs50 uh
the second to last digit five indicates
that it's a software class meanwhile
there's a class at Harbor that's not
freely available online called cs61
whose second to last digit is six of
course and six indicates a systems class
so a lower level type class there's a
class at Harvard called cs171 which is
all about visualizations and visualizing
data through Graphics that seven
indicates that it's indeed a graphics
class and something like a two is Theory
something like a three is economic
something like eight is artificial
intelligence and so it's been historic
historically at Harvard a bit of a clue
as to what type of class something is so
cs50 simply inherited that system
nowadays though as of a few years ago
Harvard has so many classes now that we
actually reinvented the future numbering
scheme so that system won't necessarily
bear out in the coming decade or two
and um not quite related but still um I
think a good question here from San Dash
who maybe for you Brian is asking how
can a person land a job in a particular
domain after completing the relevant
course without a degree giving you to
transition to Industry a few years ago
yeah it's definitely possible to get a
job uh without having a degree if you've
either self-studied or other ways that
you might have learned the tools that
you need in order to be able to do the
job I think a lot of what employers are
looking for is the kinds of experiences
and that you have an understanding that
you have the ability to once you start
the job to be able to build what it is
they're looking for you to build and so
to that extent once you've taken some
classes and I think one of the best ways
to get started is to try building
something of your own so at the end of
cs50 you build a final project of your
own that you choose the something you're
interested in and use the tools you've
learned in the class to build it and
continuing to do things like that
building projects of your own continuing
to build on existing projects that helps
you to get the experience you need to be
able to be successful in an industry
setting and after that I think it just
ends up being a lot of work to apply to
places try to find something that
matches your interest and your
experience level and that can definitely
take time it can definitely take
patience but having that practice of
having built things on your own that's
definitely helpful
and maybe you're in a current job and
there are some problems that you could
solve using computer science using your
skills you learned from cs50 like um
when I manage the course there's a lot
of scripts to help manage that course
and help do things more efficiently so
you could think of the same like what
could you automate in your current job
as well yeah and therefore in interviews
on your resume being able to speak to
those kinds of projects says a lot and
even more dare say than just saying you
took this class this class and this
class but speaking to your actual
experience
I think we have time for a few more
questions sure so one that is a pretty
easy answer is when is the cyber
security course coming out David October
1st on edx.org if you go to
cs50.edx.org cyber security all that and
more will await and I would be remiss if
I didn't plug Carter's introduction to
databases with SQL class which is coming
when October 1st wonderful at
cs50.edx.org SQL and that actually
answers the next question which was when
is SQL coming out so October 1st oh
wonderful and you know Brian I hear that
there's actually a somewhat new version
of cs50 AI if you might speak a little
bit about that yeah absolutely so the
original cs50 AI is about three years
old now and in these past three years A
lot has developed and a lot has changed
in the world of artificial intelligence
especially as it concerns natural
language processing and about AI That's
able to generate text that's able to
understand human language and
developments and the tools and
technologies that we use in order to do
that and so we have a new version of
cs50 AI that includes some updated
material about natural language and so
that is at cs50.edx.org Ai and for those
folks who might have taken cs50 AI
already but want to get the new stuff
which week should they focus on it's
just the last week so week six which is
all about natural language processing
and language in general nice
one or two other questions uh I think
that actually brings to the end of the
question I'm seeing on Instagram here
um so any final words from you all oh
words of wisdom Brian words of wisdom uh
I think computer science in general
there's so much to learn and so my
encouragement is always to keep learning
to try taking a new class to try
learning something that you've been
interested in that you just don't know
much about right now and so my word of
wisdom is to keep trying to acquire that
wisdom keep learning and if you have
questions too about cs50 or any of its
courses or computer science more
generally you can now try out as you
might have seen online the cs50 duck
which is an AI uh creature that you can
ask questions of about problem sets
about material more generally the
easiest way to access it is to go to
cs50 dot Ai and you can log in with your
existing GitHub account or if you don't
have one you can sign up for one for
free at github.com and if you're also in
the habit of using cs50. Dev which is
cs50 Zone implementation of vs code in
the cloud on top of a product called
GitHub code spaces that also has support
for the duck in fact if you look at the
activity bar along the left hand side
you should see now a duck icon that does
not just quack quack quack at you but
will actually answer you primarily in
languages like English so try that out
too for your next questions all right
well thank you all for joining us over
Instagram live we'll see you next time